# Library Management System

## The purpose of the project is to implement what I learned in my python course,
## through creating a Library Management System.

<br>

### Throughout the project, it is assumed that it is a local library

<br>

### Description
To be able to access the library, the user must first Sign Up or Login In to the system.
 - When running the code for the first time, the user must sign up as an admin to be
   able to add books to the system. OR, there is an additional function in Library.py
   which is the main interface for the program, it can be added to the main function to
   be called before the SIGN UP/LOGIN page to add books before signing up

Admin users have access to the library management, in which they can:
  - Add Books/ Remove Books
  - Add Book Copies/ Remove Book Copies
  - View book waitlists by getting user IDs
  - View member information for contact purposes (but can not view other admins' information)
  - View transaction log
    Transaction log stores all transactions (class defined in the program, that contains all transaction information), and
    identifies different transactions by their transaction ID
  -  View which transaction the copy is involved in if it is borrowed.


Member users has additional functions related to their membership subscription in the library
  - Members can join according to some membership plan provided by the library
  - By default in the program it is given in months, but it can be changed to years or days


All library users can:
  - Borrow Books
  - Return Books
    if book was returned after the date set by the user when they borrowed the book, the user will incur a fine
    (late_fine) which is set before running the program as the standard ratio to be mutiplied by the number
    of days late.
  - Reserve Book only if all copies are not available
  - Delete previously made book reservation

In addition:
  - Users can change certain account info like, phone no, address info, and password

<br>
<br>

### NOTE: ALL ADDED BOOKS AND USER ACCOUNTS WOULD BE DELETED WHEN PROGRAM RUN IS TERMINATED, AS PROGRAM IS NOT LINKED TO A DATABASE

<br>
<br>

### Description of the files
The project consists of several files

#### 1. Book.py
Copy Class, which defines a book copy:
 - Copy ID is expected to be given by Admin User as they add the book to the library and have all its information
 - It saves whether the copy is available or borrowed, and if it is borrowed, in which transaction it is involved in

Book Class, which defines a book in the library:
  - It saves all book information
  - ISBN is the unique identifier of the book, hence it is used in the Library dictionary that stores all book objects
    by their ISBN. ISBN is also expected to be given by Admin User.
  - It also stores a Copy dictionary that saves all copy objects of the book by their copyID
  - It stores a waitlist, that stores all userIDs that have reserved the book

<br>

#### 2. Transactions.py
Transaction class:
  - Transactions are created once a book is borrowed, and it is stored in transaction_log dictionary by their transaction ID
  - Transaction ID is randomly generated by the system, but each transaction is ensured to have a unique ID
  - The object stores bookID and copyID involved in the transaction, when it is expected to be returned,
    when was the transaction created, if the book is still borrowed, or has been returned.
  - Once the book is returned, the object calculates if they are any fines incured, and returns the value, and changes the
    status of the transaction to returned, in addition to make the copy available again.

<br>

#### 3. User.py
User class:
  - This is the parent class for all users
  - It defines attributes that store all of the user's information, like password, contact info, etc.
  - UserID is the unique identifier that is used in user dictionary to differentiate between different user objects
  - UserID is created by the user, but whenever the user sign ups, the system ensures that the UserID entered has not been
    used before, or it sends a message that it is taken.
  - It defines a dictionary that includes all borrowed books by their name, and the associated transaction object.
  - It defines a list of all currently reserved books by the user by their book name.
  - The class includes all functions that are done by both users, like borrowing books, returning books, etc.

Member class, derived class from User class:
  - It adds membership to the user, as member users have subscriptions to the library
  - For example, members can not borrow books if their subscription has ended
  - It adds functions to renew membership and check membership duration

Admin class, derived class from User class:
  - The class adds all the special functions available to Admins only as listed previously.

<br>

#### 4. Library.py
Defines all necessary global variable to stores necessary data used throughout the program.
- library: dictionary that stores all book objects by their book ISBN's
- link_book: links book names with their ISBNs, as sometimes non admin users may not know a book's ISBN and search for the book
            using its name.
- user: dictionary that stores all user objects by their UserIDs, the values of the dictionary are lists, where in the first index
      user type is stored (Admin or User), and in the second index the user object is stored
- transaction_log: dictionary that stores all transaction objects by their transaction IDs
- lateFine: defines the value that is multiplied for each day the member is late in returning the book, giving the fine value.

In addition it contains the main interface that appears to the user once running the program:
- Login
- Sign Up

Depending on the user type, after login, the user is either directed to the Admin Interface or the Member Interface, which provides them
with a variety of functions.

It also contains the initialize function, to add books to the library without the need to sign up as an admin prior.

The whole program is called by calling the main function.

<br>
<br>


### Improvements that could be made:
  - In the system, it is assumed that users borrow or return books by using their names, instead of their ISBN. Hence, link_book was created. But,
    the program doesn't take into consideration that more than one book can have the same name but different ISBN due to having differences in
    publishers or edition. So, the system could be improved upon by completely deleting link_book, and only allowing booking through book ISBN. OR storing
    multiple ISBNs for the same book name, but this would make functions more complex.
    
  - Make passwords hidden when user types in their password.
    
  - Connect program to a database, so that all users, books, and transactions are stored.
    
  - Members are not allowed to borrow books if their membership has expired, but no restriction was added to prevent members with
    expired membership from reserving books.

  - Restrict members from renewing their membership if their membeship has not yet.

  - Could add more checks on phone no. to ensure all characters consist of only digits.
    
  - Could specify certain userID structure.
    
  - Could add more checks on address information to ensure it is valid.

<br>
<br>

### Download Instructions:
- Download all files for the program to run
- Run the program through the Library.py file
- Ensure that main() is called at the end of Library.py
